---
layout: post
title:      "How to Navigate a Data Science Boot Camp"
date:       2020-12-11 22:20:48 +0000
permalink:  how_to_navigate_a_data_science_boot_camp
---


As I near the end of my time in a data science boot camp, I can look back and reflect on what I would have done differently, what I wish I’d known when I started, and what has most helped me along.

<h2>Do Not Try So Hard to Get Ahead of Schedule at the Expense of Everything Else</h2>
I tried to always get ahead on the curriculum and I think that’s a good goal. You do not want to spend too much time trying to understand something at the cost of learning the rest of the material. You can always go back and learn something in the future. However it is also important to truly understand the material, even if that puts you slightly behind schedule. An initial lack of understanding can snowball into a being confused for an entire module. In the long run, understanding the simple things will make it easier for you to catch up later. It is also important to not let getting ahead of schedule keep you from the rest of your life. It is crucial to take breaks, get a proper amount of sleep, and let your brain rest. You will eventually come to a breaking point and it will set you back much more than take a day off of data science every once and a while. 

<h2>Learn How to Research</h2>
The work that others generously choose to share, whether that be Kaggle competition entries or answers on Stack Overflow, has been the biggest learning tool outside of my lessons and instructors. Likewise a project can be made or broken by one’s ability to find the data one needs. However accessing this information can sometimes be tricky. Oftentimes simple googling won’t yield the results you expect. It is important to be specific in what you’re looking for but general enough to locate someone experiencing similar but not identical issues. Oftentimes simply adding “data science” or “python” onto the end of your inquiry narrows the results enough to solve the issue you’ve been facing. Other times you have to truly examine what it is you are actually searching for. Sometimes you need to interpret the error you’ve received more closely to figure out where the problem is actually originating or you need to examine what exactly is required for your question to be answer when you are gathering data. When it comes for collecting data, it is important to remember that oftentimes you will not exactly find what you need and sometimes a more general search will lead you to a more accomplishable avenue. 

<h2>Test Examples are Your Friend</h2>
When you think you have a good idea, it can be tempting to jump straight into implementation. However it is important to try out new functions, graphs, and operations on data where you know exactly what the outcome will be. It is much easier to detect an error on your 5 row toy dataframe where you can easily compute what the result should look like than a large dataset with many factors. This also cuts down on your runtime. It is better to put more time into refining a piece of code than waiting for it to run on a big dataset only to result in an unexpected complication. 

<h2>Find a Way to Practice Anything that Gives You Trouble in the Way that Works for You</h2>
Many of my fellow students recommended wonderful resources to practice the skills we were learning at such an accelerated pace, whether they be websites where you can compete in coding challenges or podcasts. If that helps you to better understand what is troubling you, then these are an excellent way to learn. However you should also consider developing personal projects about topics that excite you but may not fit into the requirements. For instance, I collected data on my favorite band from the spotify api. This is a very small project and not something that would meet the requirements of any of my projects. This is a great way to practice because it’s something exciting for me personally and my friends. The desire to get answers of this small phenomenon and share it with the group of people who would also find it interesting but do not care about data science makes this both a project I want to work on and feel like there’s less pressure to be perfect. Knowing that this project does not have to meet the specifications potential employers might expect and does not have to answer any important questions allows me to practice skills I did not get to employ in my boot camp projects. Since there are no due dates on your own personal projects you can complete them at your own pace and define success for yourself. They can also serve as a refreshing place to escape when you’re working on a frustrating project while still honing your skills. 

<h2>Take Advantage of All Resources Offered to You</h2>    
It is important to remember that you are here to learn and so is everyone else. Do not be afraid to ask the stupid question, no one is going to note it or use it to judge you. If you still don’t understand the topic, watch videos from a variety of sources. Sometimes all it takes is the right person or the right type of explanation for a concept to click. If you are still struggling, make an appointment with your instructor so that you can get to the root of the problem. Try to make the time for this and do not feel like you need to do things on your own. Lastly, do not be afraid to use the answer key. It is okay not to be able to solve every problem by yourself as long as you work to understand the solution. These resources are there to help you and you should use them to the fullest.   

<h2>But Especially Your Cohort</h2>
I was very lucky to have a cohort member who started his own study groups. Normally four of us, though sometimes more or less, came together every day to further dive into the things confusing us. No one achieves anything alone and learning together makes the work feel less difficult and the problem-solving less frustrating. Even if you feel like you are giving more than you are taking, there will come a point where your skills will come in handy whether that’s in the form of explaining a concept, finding the problem in a piece of code, or encouraging others to persevere. Your cohort-mates are an invaluable resource for both knowledge and support. I certainly would not have made it through without them.   

