---
layout: post
title:      "Why Data Science"
date:       2020-12-11 21:38:47 +0000
permalink:  why_data_science
---


I have always been a curious person. When I was a child, one of favorite activities was playing detective. As I got older the games became reading books and late-night Wikipedia rabbit holes. My curiosity led me to study psychology to research the questions that intrigued me and math to change those observations into analyses. However there was only so much I could learn with the techniques I had at hand.  In my time as a psychology student I continuously ran into the problem of being unable to answer all of the questions I sought answers for. Whether that be because many of the conventions of psychological study can feel old-fashioned or that my curiosity was more interdisciplinary than my program, I felt as though there were more ways to gather and use information. Likewise in my years of math classes, I worried that the emphasis on theory left little room for practical applications. 
On a suggestion from my father, I began to look into data science. I soon realized that data science provides tools for answering questions that have real impact on the world. My mathematics skills would provide a good entry point for understanding the foundations of the different types of models and my psychology skills have taught me to ask sound research questions and to remember that the bigger picture ultimately has to be about people. In some ways, it felt like data science was perfectly suited for me. I had already been taking some computer science classes at my local community college as the number of classes required for my psychology masters program decreased and my only obligations became conducting my thesis research. While these classes did not directly relate to data science, they provided me with the framework for thinking about solving problems via coding. 
With the idea now hanging around the back of my mind, I started to notice data science everywhere and realized that I already had many of the foundational skills that would help me work with data and turn it into useful models. As I begun this boot camp, my suspicions were confirmed. Data science has opened up an entirely new avenue to accomplish the goals I had always set out to accomplish and feed my curiosity. I had not realized the way data science had been working behind the scenes to define much of the world as I knew it until I began to dive deep into these topics. I look forward to combining my prior skills with my new data science skills to tackle problems and follow my curiosity wherever it may take me.  

